---
layout: post
title:  Orphée and the Importance of the Unconscious Mind
date:   2016-01-20 19:15:42 +0000
categories: math
---

Orphée and the Importance of the Unconscious Mind
A film analysis by Christian Lessard

	As they stand before Eurydice’s corpse, in Jean Cocteau’s Orphée (1950), Herteubise and Orphée engage one another in a short conversation about death. Herteubise, flustered by his companions’ irresponsible behaviour, claims that Orphée has one more chance to atone for his mistakes. With a keen awareness of the true cause of the demise of Orphée’s wife, he adds, insistently, that Orphée “knows death” already. Of course, Herteubise means this quite literally: he references the fact that Orphée has met with death in person, in the form of a beautiful woman. Moreover, he means to suggest that Orphée may still travel to the underworld and retrieve his wife through an appeal to higher powers. Yet despite these efforts to console the poet, Orphée’s response suggests a very different understanding of the topic at hand. Referring to death as a female, he claims that he “has spoken of her, has dreamed of her and has sung of her” but, despite having believed otherwise, “did not know her”. His words seem to be congruent with those of Herteubise, though it soon becomes clear that such accordance is impossible. Not only does Orphée fail to see the relationship between death and the beautiful woman, he remains unaware of the fact that even her chauffer, his friend Herteubise, is in fact a ghost. In spite of this, his response takes on a new layer of depth, romanticizing his loss while additionally alluding to much large issues in his life altogether.

	Part of Cocteau’s talent as both a filmmaker and a writer lies in his ability to suspend Orphée’s storyline in constant ambiguity – as in the aforementioned conversation – while still delivering a fulfilling and visceral experience to his audience. This particular film can easily be enjoyed on a superficial level, while still maintaining a constant stream of intriguing and thought provoking existential undertones. There is only one slight problem with this dualistic approach: though each scene presents room for intellectual analysis, this is often accomplished at the expense of some clarity. Many elements of the story, though not necessarily vague, are nevertheless confusing and an initial viewing of the film will often spawn a myriad of questions in the viewer’s mind, especially with respects to the nature of the realm in which the plot occurs. Since Orphée falls asleep near the beginning of the movie, only to awaken inexplicably in a field, many are led to believe that the remainder of the story is to be interpreted as a dream. The trouble with this approach is that it fails to address key elements of the plot. Namely, it lends no explanation to Death’s presence at the beginning of the film, before Orphée falls asleep, and it leave’s Herteubise’s efforts at the end of the story no less enigmatic. These are the types of uncertainties, which suggest that a slightly different approach may be required in order to fully comprehend the Orphée’s journey.

	Cocteau, in fact, does not mean to suggest that Orphée is a dream sequence, but rather that it inherits dream-like qualities. In fact, while the movie may be simply considered a touching story of adventure, romance and magic, the opening narration claims that “legend is entitled to exist beyond time and place”, suggesting that this particular legend may be interpreted in a multitude of ways. This statement, in combination with Cocteau’s surreal imagery, opens the floor to a new interpretation, in which the story exceeds its tangible qualities to directly address the complexities of human emotion and the various layers of human thought. Through this lens, Orphée’s experiences, especially in the underworld, represent an attempt at self-exploration of his own unconscious mind in a universe parallel to his own. This universe is nearly identical to the one that he originates from, but is dominated by supernatural characters and phenomena, which represent the different facets of his psyche. The film thus sets out to demonstrate that exploration and interactions with one’s own unconscious is a necessary step in not only self-understanding, but self-healing. Orphée’s demeanour, his presence in both the mortal-world and the underworld, and his interactions with the un-dead are indicative of his troubled state, and if he is to resolve these troubles, he must be willing to embrace the deepest corners of his psyche and the dreamlike world that it entails.

	Without a doubt, Orphée’s overly agitated behaviour is the most noticeable driving aspect of the film. It is essential that Cocteau establish the series of traits that contribute to his protagonist’s restlessness before all else, so as to properly foreshadow later events in the story. Orphée is established as a great poet, thought it quickly becomes obvious that his career may have begun to tread shallow waters. He confesses some of his concerns – which revolve largely around his public reputation – to a retired colleague, stating that he has “no doubt that [other poets] believe that [he] has nothing new to say, and that a poet should not be too famous”. He adds, in an annoyed and unconvincing tone, that despite this, the public still loves him. This discussion is not the only indication of Orphée’s trouble state: he quickly takes a disliking to Jacques Cegeste, a young and celebrated poet whom ‘everyone adores”, and becomes fixated on Death, who he refers to as the “Princesse”. The emotions Orphée displays in this scene are worth taking note of: he shows signs of jealousy towards Cegeste, exhibits paranoia regarding his careers, withdraws from his family and friends and then falls in love quite suddenly with a mysterious beautiful woman. Overall, his behaviour seems to be both tense and unusual, and it comes as no surprise that the emotions at play in the opening scene eventually dominate Orphée’s unconscious journey. His feelings, of course, are a product of a deeper existential crisis spawned by a slow point in his career, and they must be addressed internally before he can become happy again.

	Unfortunately, it does not immediately occur to Orphée that his troubles are the result of an internal psychological conflict. Before he can remedy his woes, he becomes convinced that he must first conquer other superficial distractions in his life. Since he is ultimately concerned with his career, he mistakenly assumes that publishing good material will put a stop to his worries. He becomes obsessed with the enigmatic signal received by Herteubise’s car radio in a desperate attempt to decipher its messages and forward them to his editor. These short communications, as we soon learn, are actually created and broadcast by the ghost of Cegeste in order to distract Orphée from his wife, so that Death may claim her. Though it appears as though Cegeste’s effort is made in order to hurt the Orphée, this is not the case. Keeping in mind that Orphée’s unnerved psyche is in fact embodied by the un-dead, it seems more likely, in actually that greater powers in his surreal universe actively force him to address his own psychological issues. When Eurydice perishes in her husband’s absence, he is launched into an emotional frenzy. Although this pains him deeply, ti inspires a suddent reconnection with his feelings, which has a necessary impact on his process of self-healing: only after Orphée achieves this state is he able to walk into the dream-like underworld and experience what it has to offer him. As early French psychologist Alfred Maury puts it, a person in dream becomes “totally revealed to himself in his naked and wretched state. As he suspends the exercise of his will, he becomes the toy of all the passion from which, when awake, our conscience, horror and fear defend us”. This is noticeable true of Orphée: once he has passed into the underworld, he becomes totally subject to its domain, and thus to his pure unconscious mind. He attempts to justify things as he has been earlier in the film, but Herteubise, like Death before him, tells his friend that he tries “too hard to understand”. The ghost means to suggest that such an experience is not meant to be intellectual, but rather that it must be experience wholeheartedly in order for any benefit to be achieved.

Second only to Orphée's own state of being, in terms of relevance to the story, is the presence of magical phenomena throughout the film. These surreal occurrences are another one of the plotline's driving forces, as it is they that help provide the audience with an understanding of the human psyche. Each of Orphée's interactions with the underworld has a notable impact on his life, and for the most part, they pertain to the three most recurring un-dead characters in the film — Herteubise, Cegeste and Death herself. Conveniently, each of these characters presents their own independent insights into Orphée's psychological state of being. Perhaps the most understated, though nevertheless important member of the trio is Cegeste, who represents both Orphée's jealousy and his desire to be young again. Orphée’s resentment of Cegeste spawns from his age and his struggling career, and his obsession with the cryptic radio broadcasts represent his desire to emulate an earlier point in his The fact that these messages are indecipherable by the poet suggests that he has long passed this stage, and moreover that he must accept this fact. When Orphée does try to publish one of Cegeste's lines, he disturbs his natural state of being, who manifests in the surreal universe as a nasty response from the poetic community. He cannot recycle old material, he must be able to come up with it on its own, or he will have accomplished nothing. Ultimately Cegeste acts as a distraction for Orphée, not only from his wife but also from his own peace of mind. He additionally makes it more difficult for Cocteau's protagonist to focus on virtuous characters like Herteubise, who represents both his loyalty and his ability to reason. This ghost is more than just a chauffeur: he often finds himself cleaning up after the protagonists agitated psyche, acting in his place whenever the poet is off doing other things.  He is the one who tends to Eurydice when her husband ignores her, and he acts as a guide in the underworld. Herteubise is loyal and respectable, and his own youthful appearance suggests that he embodies what Orphée once was, and has since struggled to be. He tries his best to help Orphée and remain/optimistic, but he cannot change the fact that the poet must come to his own conclusions about life, which may only be accomplished if the he attains his other ultimate desire: Death herself. The Grim Reaper, disguised as a beautiful woman, is the ringleader of Orphée's adventure, and it is she who awaits him in the underworld. She is one of the most important characters of Cocteau's story because she, above all else, represents his hero's ability to love. It is no secret to the audience that the troubles in Orphée's life lead to problems in his marriage: his wife, whom he is previously said to adore, begins to annoy him in nearly all of 17 their interactions. Orphée's love is a great sour e of his happiness, and it seems to be irrevocably linked to his sense of inner peace. Death captures his affection the moment he sets his eyes on her and she proceeds to constantly watch over him. As a result of this,

Orphée becomes equally concerned with contacting his"Princesse" just as much as he yearns to rejuvenate his career. Like the rest of his unconscious journey, however, his true desires are not always so clear. Before they venture into the underworld, Herteubise asks whether Orphée seeks Death or his wife. The poet is unable to answer this question, stating that he desires both. On a superficial level, he is merely unable to choose between two beautiful women, but on an existential scale he cpnot tell whether he needs to reconnect with his wife or with his own internal feelingsrIn spite of this uncertainty, Orphée's universe once against helps him make a decision. Just as it pushes him towards self-understanding by claiming his wife, it forces him to chase after the things he values deeply. When he is unable to make a decision between the two women, the council of death restricts him from looking upon his wife. Not only does this force him to reconsider how much he values his relationship, it also implies that he must indeed seek out Death. And so, when Orphée accidentally looks upon his wife and loses her forever, he finally realizes the true importance of his relationship. At this point in the story, the unconscious world begins to reject him, first ending his life, bringing him to the underworld, and then reuniting him with Death one last time before he may travel between Universes. Death claims Herteubise will reverse time, though she also removes Orphée's memories of his interactions with the underworld. This means that he may still feel as though he has accomplished a resolution, without necessarily being able to explain why4 is implied that the underworld will once again step aside, • j e e-IC/3 /4,) L7.72 waiting for Orpheus when he needs it again. Orphée's experiences, especially in the underworld, represent an atte t at self- , ri exploration of his own unconscious mind in a universe parallel to his own. This universe is '‘‘) - nearly identical the one he typically inhabits, except that it is dominated by supernatural characters and phenomena, which represent different facets of his psyche. The film sets out to demonstrate that exploration and interaction with one's own unconscious is a necessary step in not only self-understanding, but self-healing as well. The story largely suggests that Orphée turns to his unconscious - perhaps without even realizing it - when he runs into difficulties in his daily life. This universe has great influence over Orphée and, most importantly, is not limited specific characters. He isp resented with elements of his emotional psyche, as well as those of his rational. At times this surreal world acts on its own, pointing Orphée in the right direction, which suggests that the unconscious ultimately has the final say in what is best for a person's state of being, and has great influence over a person's life. Moreover, it highlights the difference between superficial worries and truly existential ones, with the former often getting in the way of the later. Only after Orphée has let go of his ego and accepted his emotions is he able to leave his unconscious happily. When Death returns him to his wife, he is overjoyed to be in her presence. The coming of his child represents the beginning of a new phase in his life, which he may now appreciate, thanks to his interactions in a world of dreams.
