---
layout: post
title:  "Learning better and using Vim"
date:   2016-10-07 18:23:31 -0400
categories: jekyll update
---

In his wonderful book ***Moonwalking With Einstein***, Joshua Foer briefly describes the cognitive process involved in learning a new skill. This process, which I'll paraphrase here, is broken down into three stages:

1. First you are introduced to the concept. You struggle to understand it and (if it is a skill that can be applied), you practice it with your full conscious attention.
2. Later, as you begin to become familiar with the concept's intracacies, you begin to reduce the amount of attention you pay to each one. Still, you must remain quite consciously engaged.
3. Finally, after much practice, you attain a mental plateau, in which you are comfortable enough that you may draw on your skills unconsciously.

To motivate the reader's belief in it, Foer supports the process with a rhetorical question: *"If we're always typing, why aren't we constantly getting better at it?"*

As you may have guessed, the third step is suppose to answer this mysterious lack of improvement we all experience eventually. It, however, only partially gets at the important aspect of that third step. Generally speaking, people want to improve at their skills for as long as they can. There isn't any particular benefit to reaching a plateau: if you can get better at something, you should. What is important, however, is that at a certain point in learning we move certain skills on the back burner and shift our attention to more pressing matters. If we couldn't do this, we'd be terrible multi-taskers. Foer's writing on the matter don't stop there, either. He makes a note that once we achieve this plateau for any particular skill, it can be very hard to "unlearn it" and improve again. That note brings us to the crux of this article: Vim.

Until recently, I'd been pretty bad at using Vim. Luckily, I hadn't used it well enough to get myself to that third stage of learning, I was sort of awkwardly dangling between the first and second. There are a lot of bad habbits that Vim-newcomers tend to inherit. A few months ago, I was guilty of a *lot* of them, to the point where it was hardly more efficient than other editors. After a few frustrating coding sessions, I decided to work out the gaps in my knowledge. If you're in the same boat as me, here's what I did:

1. *Run vimtutor*

    This is literally as easy (in OSx and most Unix-based systems) as popping open a shell and running:

    ```
    vimtutor
    ```

    Running through this doesn't take more than 25 minutes and will teach you the fundamentals that should actually be committed to memory. Take your time to run through a bunch of examples untill you're at least familiar with 'H' 'J' 'K' 'L' 'W' 'E' 'B' 'GE' 'f' 'GG' and '/'. This will be enough of a starting point to build upon, and you'll want to move these fundamentals to your unconscious mind.

2. *Learn what a .vimrc is, and build a simple one.*

    You'd be surprised how helpful a few basic settings can be. A few examples come to mind, namely turn on line numbers and adding syntax highlighting, but there are plenty of other articles out there to get you on your way. I suggest you abide by two golden rules:

    a) Don't add anything to your .vimrc that you don't understand
    b) Don't add something to your .vimrc unless it solves a problem that's annoyed you several times.

    These should be pretty self-explanatory, and I only recommend the second so that you don't spend countless hours trying to come up with the perfect .vimrc that solves problems you never even run into. Take this with a grain of salt, but remember that Vim is suppose to make you faster and free up your time.

3. *Turn off the arrow keys.*

    Seriously, turn them off. It's terrible form to use them instead of 'H' 'J' 'K' 'L'. Turning them off will force you to form a new habbit, and you'll realize how much nicer it is to keep your hands in one condensed area of the keyboard.

    You can turn off your arrow keys like so:

4. *Turn off "H" and "L"*

    This might seem hypocritical given point 3, but it's only meant to be temporary. Holding down "H" and "L" to get somewhere in your program is also bad form, since (as you'll know from the tutor) there are lots of other commands to help. Disabling these keys will force you to make use of 'W' 'E' 'B' 'GE', as well as 'f', which will by far improve your in line editing the most.

    As a complimentary task I suppose you could go ahead and disable 'j' and 'k' as well, but you should also realize that a combination of turning line numbers on and using 'gg' can take you wherever you need to go along that axis.

5. *Remap ESC*

    Isn't it annoying reaching over (probably with your middle or ring finger) to hit ESC every time you want to switch modes? I recommend you remad it to BLANK

6. *Go above and beyond*

    These tricks should get you pretty far, in fact, most of the editing you'll end up doing will depend on these essential navigation techniques. The other key insight is to realize that INSERT mode is only one of many for a reason. Namely, you shouldn't spend the bulk of your editing time in insert - the idea is that you should write text in short bursts, navigate around and then change things or edit some more. A mentality switch will take you a long way.

    On that note, you should realize that improving your work flow to better incorporate Vim can make it a much more effective tool. Ideally, you don't want to open a new Vim session, only to close it and quickly check another files contents (maybe a constant or macro defined in a header file). Go ahead a look into better window managers (like I3) or other programs (like tmux) that can help you avoid jumping in and out of editing sessions. Try to get in the habit of running with with a clear goal, doing the work you need to get done, and then exiting the program. It'll speed things up a lot.
